+++
blogimport = true
categories = ["blog"]
date = "2013-08-09T23:16:00Z"
draft = true
title = "Life Is A Series Of Incredibly Unlikely Coincidences  "
updated = "2013-08-09T23:16:49.000+00:00"
[author]
name = "Erik McClure"
uri = "https://plus.google.com/104896885003230920472"

+++
{{%blockquote%}}*“We must let go of the life we have planned, so as to accept the one that is waiting for us.” — Joseph Campbell*{{%/blockquote%}}
When I was 5 years old, I had a toy piano. This was the only musical instrument in the entire house. I quickly became obsessed with it and demanded that my parents give me piano lessons. Because of this, they bought an upright piano for me to practice on. It was through this upright piano my improvisational skills became apparent, and eventually led to me asking about how I could compose my own music instead of simply performing it. Unfortunately, in response, my teacher simply dumped a bunch of bland music theory books in front of me.

I did not go to the elementary school I was supposed to go to. My parents got a variance so I could attend one on the other side of the hill because it had full-day kindergarten. It was during recess in this kindergarten class that I made a choice. We were playing a game that, as usual, involved teams of girls vs. boys. There were more boys than girls. I choose to join the girls side, because otherwise "it wasn't fair". Later, in 5th grade, there was a new kid in class. We quickly bonded over our mutual dislike of bullies, and by the end of the year we were best friends.

I continued my own investigations into music despite my inability to get the answers I wanted out of the adults. It was around this time I was given an old electric piano that used to belong to my Uncle, since I was the only musically inclined member of my extended family. I quickly figured out how to program the various aspects of this piano and came up with some synth sounds of my own. When I was 12, I improvised a song that was so good I decided to record it the only way I knew how - [using a tape recorder](https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/755994/Crystal_Caverns_12_Crystal_Caverns.mp3). 

A year later, my parents got me [Freelancer](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freelancer_(video_game)) for christmas, after a friend at microsoft mentioned it, and spent the rest of the year playing it. I realized I could use a stereo cord to directly record my electric piano improvisations, finally allowing me to start working on my first "album", of sorts. Meanwhile, my best friend had discovered a cheap little animation trick, where you open a text file in notepad, shrink the window to only show one line at a time, and then scroll through it, which creates a textual "animation" of sorts.

Then, fate struck. Now 14 years old, I had been creating little text animations of my own. I showed one to my father, who was a software engineer working on a company he had founded. He built a tiny little automatic text-animation-player in Visual Basic and gave it to me. Before that moment, I knew computers ran programs and that someone had to create them, but I assumed it was far beyond me. Suddenly, I realized that *I* could write programs of my own, and started digging through books on Visual Basic.

By now, I had beaten Freelancer 10 times over, and was getting involved in the modding community for it. One fateful day on Lancers Reactor, I saw a news post asking for help on a Halo crossover mod for Freelancer. At first, I ignored it, but then, for some reason, I decided to click on the link. I offered to use what little programming I knew to help efforts to organize the mod, and was eventually put in charge of it. A 15 year old in charge of a mod went about as well as you would expect, and it rapidly imploded. However, during this time, I made a friend I would later co-found [Black Sphere Studios]() with. The company's name originated from our online handles: I was blackhole, and he was solusphere.

After the freelancer mod imploded, I spent time improving my musical composition skills, and offered to help write music for a Descent 3 mod that was attempting to create a fan-made plot for Descent 4. By sheer luck, someone else had already offered to do music as well, and he introduced me to FL Studio. Suddenly, I had the tools I needed to create music that wasn't just improvisation. In turn, I introduced another one of my friends to it, and he started trying to compose music himself. 

While teaching myself C++, I got together with some of my friends from the freelancer mod to try and make our own 3D game. This failed miserably, but it was during this time that I was linked to [Freefall](http://freefall.purrsia.com/) by my future cofounder. It was through the forums on the Freefall comic I was introduced to what the internet calls "furries", and abruptly deciding that, if I was going to have an anthropomorphic avatar, it was going to be a rabbit. This sparked my love of cute fuzzy things, which would grow into something of a rabbit obsession over the years.

After my attempt at 3D game failed, I played Cave Story. I realized that not only did I like working on realtime graphics, but if I focused on something simple like Cave Story, I could do it myself, and so I began working on an open-source 2D graphics engine, which eventually turned into the proprietary [PlaneShader](http://blackspherestudios.com/products/ps/) engine.

In my junior year of high school, I took notice of a [certain animator](http://ryanide.deviantart.com/), after [one of his animations](http://ryanide.deviantart.com/art/Two-Heroes-WIP-number-2-87244651) captured my imagination. I began to wonder if I could get his attention with my graphics engine, but ended up composing a song for him instead. I was absolutely terrified of talking to someone with 400000 pageviews on deviantART, but decided to take a risk and sent him a link to the song anyway. He *actually replied*, and later [drew art for the song](http://ryanide.deviantart.com/art/Amefurikozou-72660459). I kept in touch with him, but tried not to bother him too much.

Around my senior year of high school my cave-story game had evolved into something substantially more ridiculous (which will likely never see the light of day), and the friend I had introduced FL studio to showed me a particular synth VSTi - z3ta+. My experimentations with that synth directly inspired [this song](http://www.newgrounds.com/audio/listen/216830), which I submitted to Newgrounds somewhere around 10 PM.

New songs submitted to Newgrounds only stay in the recent song queue for about 20-30 minutes. By sheer luck, a [certain artist](http://trelldain.com/) stumbled on my song and left a review on it. Had I submitted my song a scant half hour later, he never would have seen it. His avatar was an adorable kitty, and thanks to my interest in cute fuzzy things, I checked his profile and found his comic strip. A short while later, we became close friends. It turns out he was also interested in game design, and had done a substantial amount of work in Game Maker. His experiences with it made a lasting impact on how I designed my graphics engine.

Near the end of my freshman year of college, the animator I had been idolizing ran into trouble with the game he was working on. His programmer had dropped out, and hadn't actually made any progress, so I jumped at the chance. While I eventually succeeded in writing a prototype of the game, we realized that a 2D fighter was way too much work for just a single animator and programmer. Despite this, we became good friends, and he suggested a game based on Terraria that would be easier to make. I mentioned this to my cofounder, who made an offhand remark that eventually turned into the incredibly whacko game idea I'm currently working on (that ended up having nothing in common with Terraria other than involving a tile-based engine).

Our lives are threads of incredibly unlikely coincidences that leap off one another, until the sum total of any one human life seems almost impossible. Multiple tiny, inconsequential choices set into motion events that would ripple through my future, shaping my life for years to come. Clicking on a link. Submitting a song to Newgrounds at just the right time. Haphazardly sending a fan-made song to a famous animator I didn't even know. We must never ignore how much can change by taking a different route home one day. Every day, we should be looking for opportunities to do something a little crazy, a little unexpected, a little outside our comfort zone. Sometimes, we'll get lucky, and it will often be in ways we simply never thought about.
