+++
blogimport = true
categories = ["blog"]
date = "2022-12-17T17:16:00.000+00:00"
draft = false
title = "Money Is Fake. It's Not Real. It's Made Up."
updated = "2022-12-17T17:16:00.000+00:00"
[author]
name = "Erik McClure"

+++

{{<blockquote>}}<b>Death</b>: No. Humans need fantasy to be human. To be the place where the falling angel meets the rising ape.
<br/><b>Susan</b>: With tooth fairies? Hogfathers?
<br/><b>Death</b>: Yes. As practice, you have to start out learning to believe the little lies.
<br/><b>Susan</b>: So we can believe the big ones?
<br/><b>Death</b>: Yes. Justice, mercy, duty. That sort of thing.{{</blockquote>}}

I want to start this by saying that I am in favor of a wealth tax. We should be increasing taxes on the wealthy and raising minimum wage, because we know that steadily increasing the relative buying power of the poor is the best way to improve an economy. However, none of this happens in a vacuum. When we talk about income equality, I have become distressed at the amount of ignorance on display about the economy, systemic societal problems, and even what money actually is.

[One Pixel Wealth](https://mkorostoff.github.io/1-pixel-wealth/) is a webpage from 2021 that helps visualize how truly insane the amount of wealth that the richest people have actually is. While the visualization is great at putting in perspective just how much Jeff Bezos' wealth is *on paper*, it links to a refutation of the [Paper Billionaire Argument](https://github.com/MKorostoff/1-pixel-wealth/blob/master/THE_PAPER_BILLIONAIRE.md) to dispute the idea that Jeff Bezos doesn't *really* have that much money in liquid assets. 

This counter-argument is **incredibly stupid**. It demonstrates a total lack of understanding about macro-economic forces. Ironically, this is because it cannot appreciate the scale of its own arguments, the exact issue that One Pixel Wealth is trying to address. Let me paraphrase the key arguments that it makes:

  1. The paper billionaire argument is that, because [most wealth is in stocks or bonds](https://www.cnbc.com/2018/02/07/where-the-super-rich-keep-their-money.html), selling it all at once would flood the market and crater the total value of those assets. 
  2. This argument makes no sense, because you can liquidate the wealth over time in a [controlled sell-off](https://corpgov.law.harvard.edu/2016/03/24/a-guide-to-rule-10b5-1-plans/), which [executives do regularly](https://www.cnbc.com/2020/02/11/jeff-bezos-sold-4point1-billion-worth-of-amazon-shares-in-past-week.html). 
  3. Given that [$122 trillion worth of stock](https://www.nasdaqtrader.com/trader.aspx?id=FullVolumeSummary#) changes hands in the US every year, you could liquidate a trillion dollars over five years and only constitute 0.16% of all the trading.
  4. Because 50% of all US households own stock, you will always be able find people to buy the stock the billionaires are selling, it's not just other billionaires that will buy it.
  5. Even if the paper bilionaire argument was true, if selling all the stock would lose 80% of it's value, that would leave behind $700 billion.
 
To start, #2 and #3 don't work for one very simple reason: A stock's value represents the market's confidence in the stock producing future value. Owning stock, in some circumstances, is interpreted as having confidence in that future value. If the market loses confidence in your company, it doesn't matter what assets you have, your stock price will crater if the market thinks you'll start losing money long-term. If the *CEO OF A COMPANY* starts liquidating their position (which they must state their entire stock selling plan ahead of time, years before it completes), the market will panic and the stock price will implode at the mere *announcement* of the liquidation, let alone actually selling any stock. Elon Musk right now should make it painfully obvious that he was only ever a billionaire on paper, because he just lost [$107 billion dollars](https://www.cbsnews.com/news/elon-musk-wealth-bernard-arnault-richest-person-forbes-bloomberg-gdp/#:~:text=Arnault%2C%2073%2C%20owns%2048%25,billion%20loss%20on%20the%20year) this year! He only bought Twitter for $44 billion! You simply cannot make the combined GDPs of Bulgaria, Croatia, Iceland and Uruguay *evaporate* if that money was actually real in any sense. 

**Money does not represent physical assets.** Money is supposed to represent human labor, and there is a fixed amount of human labor available on the planet. When someone dies or is incapacitated, it goes down. When someone graduates into the labor force, or becomes more skilled, it goes up. In ancient times, "human labor" was heavily correlated to how much physical activity someone could do, like lifting things or harvesting food. However, our modern economy is dominated by specialist jobs done by highly skilled laborers. So for the sake of analysis, we can say that the GDP of the entire planet should ideally represent the maximum amount of labor the entire human race could do, if we assigned everyone to the job they are most qualified for. We could then increase the total amount of labor we can do by either building machines or improving our skills.

This leads into why point #4 is complete nonsense. It reminds me of when Ben Shapiro, when talking about climate change, asked "you think that people aren't going to just sell their homes and move?"

{{<html>}}<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/X9FGRkqUdf8" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>{{</html>}}

The **entire point of wealth inequality** is that the top 1% [hold more money than the **entire middle-class**](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-10-08/top-1-earners-hold-more-wealth-than-the-u-s-middle-class?leadSource=uverify+wall). That's *literally* ***THE PROBLEM***. How can everyone else possibly buy all the stock the billionaires are selling if it would require all of their savings? Who are you selling the stocks too???? *THAT ISN'T HOW MONEY WORKS!* One Pixel Wealth even tries to claim that if we just gave all the poor people in america a bunch of money it would fix poverty, while [linking to a study](https://www.givedirectly.org/research-on-cash-transfers/) that only applies to **local** economies. The *world's largest economy* is **NOT** a local economy! These measures only work when the global economy can absorb the difference, which means making changes slowly or only in limited areas.

Of course, even if you somehow magically liquidated all your assets and acquired $700 billion dollars in real, liquid cash, it's not actually $700 billion dollars. It's like saying that there are gold asteroids worth [$10000 quadrillion dollars](https://tech.hindustantimes.com/photos/this-asteroid-is-worth-10-000-quadrillion-71659963582639.html) - that's not how commodities work, they can't possibly be worth that much because the value would plummet if you actually had that much gold. Since money represents human labor, which is a limited resource, simply having more money does not let you do more things. $700 billion dollars is enough to hire 12 billion people for 1 day working at minimum wage ($7.25), but you can't actually do that, because there's only 7.8 billion people in the entire world. People claim that some billions of dollars will be enough to eradicate malaria or provide drinking water to everyone, but it's *never that simple* because these are always *geopolitical issues*. Bill Gates has donated [billions of dollars](https://fortune.com/2018/04/18/bill-gates-foundation-malaria/) since [2005](https://www.gatesfoundation.org/ideas/media-center/press-releases/2005/10/gates-foundation-commits-2583-million-for-malaria-research) and we only got a vaccine [16 years later](https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2021/10/6/who-reccomends-rollout-of-malaria-vaccine-for-african-children). We are so used to problems being solved with more money that we forget how some problems are really, truly, fundamentally hard problems that cannot be solved by just throwing money at them. At some point there are just too many cooks in the kitchen.

 Note that this labor distribution problem applies to *liquid assets*, which is one theory on why inflation had (until 2021), remained fairly low despite the amount of wealth increasing to ridiculous amounts. Wealthy people are acting as gigantic money sinks - by absorbing all of the "money", the actual amount of real, liquid cash in the economy increased at a modest rate, so inflation remained stable. Of course, inflation has started to skyrocket, and you could blame the stimulus payments, but the reality is that the low interest rates during the pandemic, combined with other complex macroeconomic forces, likely caused it, although nobody knows for sure. If wealthy people started actually spending all their money at once, as people seem to want them to do, the amount of liquid assets would skyrocket and so would inflation.

I keep saying that money is *supposed* to represent human labor, because it's really just an approximation. It should be obvious that one person may be much more productive at one job than at another, so the amount of human labor is not a knowable constant, or even a singular value. Instead, it helps to think of money as representing *percieved power imbalance* (conservatives often make the mistake of thinking it represents *actual* power imbalance, which it does not). This power imbalance can come from economic, diplomatic, or military factors. Basically, money is just the current state of global geopolitics. You cannot fight wealth inequality by just redistributing money. Simply taking money from rich people does not fix the systemic issues that created the power imbalance in the first place, because it's not actually *wealth* inequality, it's *power* inequality, and that is a political issue, not an economic one. Money is simply our way of quantifying that imbalance, and it only has meaning when we decide it does. The government's unwillingness to tax rich people is *because* of the power imbalance, it's not the *cause* of it. If it is unwilling to go after rich people, it's because those rich people hold an inordinate amount of sway over politicians, as that what makes them [keys to power](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rStL7niR7gs).

It means that we have allowed power to accumulate in dangerously high concentrations, and we need to deal with this at a political level before we get an economic solution. We must elect leaders that help tackle the power imbalance (like break up the huge corporations holding the country hostage), not before. Go vote.