+++
categories = ["blog"]
comments = []
date = "2021-10-18T01:06:00Z"
title = "The Nuerodivergents Will Inherit The Earth"
draft = true
[author]
name = "Erik McClure"

+++

Decades ago, something absolutely unheard of happened - [a nerd became the richest person on the planet](https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/business/1995/07/05/bill-gates-tops-forbess-list-of-worlds-richest/d6fa8522-2ccb-4635-b722-0b0b6b31bbd3/). This, of course, was merely a consequence of the fact that Software Was Eating The World, as we are all now *painfully* familiar with. Programming, once delegated to glasses-wearing nerds banging away on strange devices that could add numbers really fast, was transformed into something that many people were interested in - mostly because it was making tons of money. Nowadays, as software permeates almost every aspect of modern life, programming is now "cool", or at least firmly entrenched alongside doctors and lawyers as a respected, high income career path.

If you think about it, this represents an extremely significant societal restructuring. All these nerds being put in charge of things have very different priorities than the traditional businessmen that came before. Combined with the fact that the best programmers can come from anywhere, including diverse and underserved backgrounds, this has forced software companies to cater to minorities simply to attract the best programmers, espiecally the LGTBQ+ community. Adding benefits specifically designed for trans people is the archetypical example, although there are many others. 

As our world changes, the kinds of people we need to support our society changes with it. I don't think people appreciate just how much the world has diverged from the nuerotypical-cisgendered-heterosexual norms that were so entrenched just a hundred years ago. It's not just that the social fabric of society has changed, _the world_ has changed. Climate Change is now an existential threat. Software and the digital world are not simply merging with physical reality, they _dominate_ it. [7 of the 10 largest companies](https://www.statista.com/statistics/269857/most-profitable-companies-worldwide/) by marketshare are software or hardware companies (8 if you count Tesla). The exceptions are Berkshire Hathaway and a Saudi energy company. This is a *titanic shift* in economic power that's happened in just the past few decades.

This is not unique to modern history. Each major technological or geopolitical shift in human history changes the balance of power between different groups of people. World War II's [Rosie The Riveter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rosie_the_Riveter) is the most recent example of a sudden geopolitical change (namely, a global [Total War](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Total_wars) necessitating a drastic social shift. Women were encouraged to take manufactering jobs previously reserved for men. It is difficult to appreciate just how unusual this was, including the fact that after the war ended, the government abruptly started pressuring women to "return to normalcy". Sound familiar? While most women reluctantly returned to more traditional jobs, some historians argue it was the impetus for what is called [The Quiet Revolution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Women_in_the_workforce#The_Quiet_Revolution), which served as the tipping point for women permanently entering the workforce and occupying previously male-dominated roles.

Going back farther, the obvious other major shifts were the [First](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Industrial_Revolution) and [Second Industrial Revolution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Second_Industrial_Revolution). The industrial revolution notably involved a steep decline in infant mortality, but not child mortality, as the baby boom resulted in a massive increase in child labor that was much more deadly than the farm work they were doing before. This eventually resulted in much stricter child labor laws in the UK and United States. Ancient history is full of tribes and civilizations that displayed a huge amount of variation depending on their particular geographic and technological pressures, including concepts of [alternative genders](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Third_gender) or even [different ways of expressing time](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chronemics).

Humans display a remarkable amount of variation, both physiologically and psychologically. A given human society is a particular subset of all possible personalities that is able to self-organize and maintain order. In any society, what exactly a "reasonable person" is and what constitutes a crime may vary widely. Even within a given society, different factions, each made up of their own particular subset of personalities, can vie for power. 




The full effects of VR have not yet been appreciated. It is still in an early adopter phase, where the potential has not even been remotely realized. We only have a scant few video games that can take advantage of it meaningfully, a few poor attempts at metaverses, and essentially zero productivity apps (because the resolution isn't there yet). We are teetering near another tipping point, where the entire world is utterly devoured by VR and AR in ways that people have difficulty appreciating because the hardware isn't quite there yet. Once we do reach the point where the hardware gets just good enough to make a few critical things possible - like comfortable reading without headaches - then suddenly everything will change.

I know at least 8 plural people. "Plural" people are people who have multiple distinct "entities" instead of a single person. They are so good at programming it is difficult to describe the things they are capable of. Over half my friends have ADHD, and when hyperfocused are capable of things no nuerotypical person could ever possibly do. These are people who are capable of thinking in ways that "normal" people cannot hope to touch without doing a lot of drugs (and not just adderall). They don't just think outside the box, they think outside of boxes people can't even *see*.

In real life, this is sadly not always a useful skill. The real world is constrained by physics and euclidean space. Cities are often noisy. Nature can be an avalanche of sensory overload. These things can often be suffocating to nuerodivergent people, espiecally those on the autistic spectrum who have difficulty filtering out external stimuli. This is a pretty big problem in real world situations that often demand being able to work in chaotic environments. However, it is completely absent in virtual spaces. A virtual world can exist in ways that reality could never possibly mimic. Non-euclidean physics are easy. Selective filtering of sound sources and conversations is trivial. Temporarily teleporting to your room to get away from a loud party is now just a click away. All the constraints are now completely different, and it is in this environment that Nuerodivergent people *thrive*. 