+++
blogimport = true
categories = ["blog"]
date = "2014-04-07T12:43:00Z"
draft = true
title = "The Future Of Welfare"
updated = "2014-04-07T12:43:58.000+00:00"
[author]
name = "Erik McClure"
uri = "https://plus.google.com/104896885003230920472"

+++
In the future, what will the unemployment rate be?

The Industrial Revolution decimated the traditional job market of that era. The invention of threshing machines put so many farm laborers out of work, it was one of the driving factors behind the [Swing Riots](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swing_Riots). The invention of robotics allowed for the automation of assembly lines and resulted in millions of factory workers finding themselves suddenly obsolete. The [proliferation of software](http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424053111903480904576512250915629460) through the world's economy has automated most menial labor, and our economy is now suffering from millions of jobs taken by computers instead of people.

The inevitable erosion of all repetitive tasks has major implications for the future of work. Software and robotics will eventually destroy almost the entire physical labor market. Why pay people to build a house when an army of robots can do it for you? As this section of the economy deteriorates, the most valuable commodity will rapidly become human creativity. Our entire job market is slowly and inexorably moving towards a future where all jobs are either intelligent, creative, or social in nature.

This is a wealth distribution problem. Purely creative and social jobs tend to produce very little profit by themselves. All the money will be generated by intellectual job positions, such as mathematicians and software engineers.
